---
layout : post
title  : A Solution to the Paradox of the Surprise Exam
---
Disjunction of two non-surprising things can surprise. If I tell someone I will have an apple, he won't be surprised when I have it. Same with an orange. But when I tell him I will have either an apple or an orange, he will learn new information (and be surprised in that sense) when I finally pick one (or both) and start to eat. 

The paradox of the surprise exam misses this point. 

The paradox goes as follows. You have to put a surprise exam in a book. You can't put it on the last page because when readers turn to the second last page, they'll know beforehand that the surprise exam is on the last page. The exam is thus not on the last page. If it is on the second last page, when readers turn to the third last page, they'll know beforehand the exam is on the second last page because it can't be on the last. So it's not on the second last page either. Lather, rinse and repeat until you run out of pages. The surprise exam can't be on any page. But everyone knows that there are surprise exams, so what went wrong ?

In our quest for a fix, let's go back to the third last page. There are two possibilities left :  the exam is either on the second last page or the last page. I'll not rush into saying that it is not on the last page because of our reasoning in above paragraph. I'll instead say, it may be on the last page in which case it is not a surprise exam. Don't worry, I'll remedy the contradiction. Another possibility is that it is on the second last page. Now, recall the apple orange analogy given at the very top. Ask yourself : "Do I learn anything new about the exam when I flip to the next page ?". 

Yes of course ! You learn its position more precisely. You finally know if it is on the second or the last page. In this sense, every page flick is a surprise telling you that the exam isn't on this page. If the exam was placed on the last page, it would rather contradictorily surprise, because you had very logically (or stupidly !) thought with utmost certainty that it CAN'T be on the last page. The exam therefore surprises you till the very end of the book - except the transition from the second last to the last page. Even there, perhaps we can choose not to put any exam whatsoever, keeping the surprise alive until the person yells at our willingness to sacrifice logic for surprise.

The point is, surprise isn't defined by a system of logic. We import its definition. The surprise exam paradox makes the mistake of importing the definition "not being able to predict that the exam is on a certain page with utter certainty until we are finally on that page". This is the paradoxical definition. Our definition is "If flipping a page tells us information about the position of the exam we didn't know before, it is a surprise exam". Under our definition, even an exam on the last page is a surprise for someone on the first n-2 pages. 

In math and logic circles, there is a method of proof where you assume something, logically conclude a contradiction from your assumption, and then say "since there was nothing wrong with my inference, my assumption must be wrong", at which point you throw away the assumption. In the surprise exam paradox, you define the surprise exam, use a set of logical deductions to conclude that such a surprise exam exists and doesn't exist at the same time. There is no paradox here anymore - if we remember that it's our *assumption* to define the surprise exam that way, we see that our assumption leads to an impossible situation, and is therefore false. This is just a proof (by contradiction) stating such exams can't exist. 

When you import definitions or assumptions in your system of logic, you break the isolation of the system, and now it's not just the rules of logic but also what you imported that dictates the conclusions. Definitions matter. It matters even more to remember that to the logical system definitions are just *assumptions*. Forgetting that leads one to find paradoxes, truthhoods and falsehoods where none exist. 

If you have pointed out a flaw in my reasoning, or want to share something, please email me. You can find my email in the footer. 